25 Oct 2011 Afternoon: 

Sensor Science
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Science drives technology to deliver the science.
In some ways the technology drives the science.

We're building NEON yet we still have questions how we will use that system.

Eyes open one day per year.
--------------------------------------

talk 1: Emery Boose, Harvard Forest

Provenance for Sensor Networks

the history or lineage of a thing.
Look into future, anticpate problems that may arise as sensor networks become more complex.

Analytic Web Project.
	Computer science colleagues.  How to make science analyses reproduceable.
	Keep track of what was done.
	
Sensor Data Processing
	generic sensor network:
		sensor -> logger -> computer -> server
	linear processor
	divide into its sub-steps
	data values and actions on those
	
	loggers are programmed to aggregate measurements
	may apply a QC routine
	PC may fill gaps

	annotations
	narrative in methods section in publication
	flags in data tables

automatd data collection
QC sometimes automated

as senosr networks grow, will become impossilbe to do this automatically

lots of avenues to supply missing data from other sources.
The more info we collect, the lower impact of failed sensor
but greater impact on analytical system.

Sensor Data Processing
	example: sensor drift
	post processing can improve data product
	get series of dataset revisions over time
	at some point, exceed ability of our metadata to capture this complexity

Proces Definition Graph
	tree of steps - LittleJill from Lerner et al. 2011
	developed at HFR
	template for what could happen as a process executes
	kind of like Kepler, a workflow
	supports execution of the process
	may support rigorous analysis of execution pathways to validate the type of statistics

Data Derivation Graph
	audit trail of a single execution of th e process (what did happen)
	Provides complete derivation history for data products (provenance)
	Diagrams differ for each case running the same process
	Control flow of complex process
	How to store and optimize this information, query and visualize.

Provenance Metadata Standards
	Kepler
	Little JIL
	Taerna

	users may want to combine more than one: Workflow interoperability
	exchange data
	exchange provenance metadata
	

Research Questions
	What infor needs to be captured to fully describe a process and its execution?

	What are effective ways to store, optimize, query, and visualize provenance metadat?

	Can we develop provenance metadata standards to suport interoperability?

Question:
	What about storing gap filling parameters as agents in workflows?
	
Emery:
	that provides template.  But would want to know exact params that went into script.

-------------------------------
talk 2
Dan Dickinson - Florida Coastal Everglades

Long-Term Acoustical and Meteorological Monitoring of the Florida Everglades
School of Music

began with artistic standpoint.  long-term audio files in everglades to use in music composition.
Realized we could attempt correlations between audio and other environmental data.

Cricket as Thermomenter 1897

Goals:
	high-quality, long-term audio for about 1 year
	correlated environmental data
	near-real-time internet access
	automated extraction of interesting events
	self-contained, cost-effective, low-maintenance

gladesBox - HD Soundscape Recording

architecture
	fitPC - PC size of a hand, linux
	USB, internet, monitor connection
	2 Tb drive (1 year is 8.5 Tb)
	solar powered with boat battery

	time-stamped into 1-minute files
	sent via zigby radio each minute

	plan to receive at nearly site with internet access

Analysis
	audio-novelty algorithm
	pick features to extract
	output is a novelty curve
	RMS and spectral sensoid

	this detects airplaines and dogs

Optimization
	GPU-based acceleration
	NVIDIA Tesla Supercomputer 170x speedup over sequential implementation
	Novelty of novelty for multi-day sound files

Status
	2010 pilot deployment in Taylor Slough
	deploy antenna on tower at Beard Research STation
	Stream data every minute to nearby receiver to make available on the internet

Future
	expand microphone array
	smaller form factor
	multiple sites
	artistic goals
	correlation of audio and meteorological data
	online tools for accessing data
Questions

Pulling anomalies, novelty, out of data

Surprize analogy

-------------------------------
3rd talk
Lindsey Rustad - Syntesis of survey results and NERC regional examples


62 respondents
45 research sites/groups
EFR, LTER, Other

survey answers are aggregated as one per site

Climate sensors
	35 sites air temperature
	most sites did met measurements
	
Aquatic sensors
	28 water temperature
	28 water flow
	20 specific conductance
	14 turbidity
	14 ph
..

Terrestrial
	25 soil temperature
	23 soil moisture
	16 water table
	9 soil respiration
...
	3 acoustical

Existing WSNs?
	62% yes
	7% uin process
	9% planned
	others just here to learn

Barriers
	financial 20
	trained personnel 17
	other 15
	programming 13
	hardware 10
	software 9

we now have "candle" programs but dont have off-the-shelf progs we ar comfy useing.
trying to write from ground up

hw/sw - know which to use. where to start

Top Barriesrs Explained

10 finances
7 remote access
6 lack of expertise
3 complex terrain - line of sight
3 inadequate power
3 inadequate internet access
3 not enough time

wireless networks help us overcome remote access but in reality we need access to them

Some of those barriers we can target and overcome, ie sharing expertise.

How are WSN's Being Used Now
	"Measure adn monitor climate change, hydrologic cycle, carbon cycling, nutrient fluxes, soil respiration, and NEE."
	NEE = ?

	"... determine drives of ecosytem cahnge and responses... episodic events"

	"forecast ... flood warnings"

	"anticpate ecosytem shyifts from the *variance* in high-resolution data"

	"... public outreach"

	"...primary background for al most all sci questions"

How COULD WSN be sued?

	"dramatically improve models for carbon flux and UV attenuation and lake response to climate change"
	"... field to remote sensing... daily/seasonal variation..."
	"... identify environmental drivers of ... phenologies,.."
	"... plant controls onstream hydrologic response..."  a basic ecology question
	" precip affect lake transparency... predict long-term from short-term events"

Dream of?
	"understand forest metaboilism and glacial recession"
	~ acoustical to look at pop and dispersal of endemic species
	~ pathogen sensor... predict health and saftey
	monitor indicator bacteria in real time
	climate change affect water balance

(just get those from slides - bad notes!)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------


